---
title: "A stable, multiplatform Molecule 1.0"
layout: post

external: true
blog: Cash App Code Blog
blog_link: https://code.cash.app/molecule-1-0

categories: post
tags:
- Android
- Kotlin
---

Molecule is a Compose-based library which we [announced two years ago](https://code.cash.app/the-state-of-managing-state-with-compose) for managing application state. I’m excited to announce that today we are releasing version 1.0, its first stable version!

In the time since the original post, Molecule has gained two major features:

1. Support for Kotlin multiplatform targets (JVM, JS, and native) in addition to just Android.
2. An immediate recomposition mode saving you from needing to supply a frame clock.

How are these useful? Let’s look at an example!

A pure Compose UI app may separate state-producing composables from UI-rendering composables.

```kotlin
@Composable fun counter(start: Int = 0): Int {
  var count by remember { mutableStateOf(start) }

  LaunchedEffect(Unit) {
    while (true) {
      delay(1.seconds)
      count++
    }
  }

  return count
}

@Composable fun CounterText(value: Int) {
  Text("$value", fontSize = 20.sp)
}
```

Now `CounterText()` can easily be used with `@Preview` and/or [Paparazzi](https://cashapp.github.io/paparazzi/) snapshot testing. The state-producing `counter()` can be even more powerful as used alongside features of Molecule.
### Increasing reuse
Migrating a large, `View`-based Android app to Compose UI takes a very long time. Instead of keeping state logic written in libraries like RxJava during the UI rewrite, logic can be migrated to Compose early and exposed to `View`s as a `StateFlow`.

```kotlin
fun CoroutineScope.launchCounter(start: Int = 0): StateFlow<Int> {
  return launchMolecule(mode = ContextClock) {
    counter(start)
  }
}
```

With Compose running outside the context of Compose UI and producing plain data, other destinations like notifications, widgets, and more can become the target of your output.

### Separating the clock

It doesn't always make sense to recompose `counter()` at the rate of the UI framework when using it more like a presenter. Molecule’s “immediate” recomposition mode triggers whenever there are new changes to produce.

```kotlin
fun countFlow(start: Int = 0): Flow<Int> {
  return moleculeFlow(mode = Immediate) {
    counter(start)
  }
}
```

This `Flow` will produce a new value every second, since that’s when the internal timer updates the internal `count` and notifies Compose of pending state change.

### Simplifying testing

The logic of `counter()` exposed as a `Flow` can now be unit tested with [Turbine](https://github.com/cashapp/turbine/).

```kotlin
@Test fun counts() = runTest {
  countFlow().test {
    assertEquals(0, awaitItem())
    assertEquals(1, awaitItem())
    assertEquals(2, awaitItem())
  }
}
@Test fun countStart() = runTest {
  countFlow(start = 3).test {
    assertEquals(3, awaitItem())
    assertEquals(4, awaitItem())
  }
}
```

And these unit tests will run on the JVM, because…

### Multiplatform usage

Molecule runs on every Kotlin multiplatform target supported by the JetBrains Compose runtime. So in addition to enabling unit tests on the JVM, your `counter()` can now be run on platforms like iOS targeting SwiftUI or the web targeting the DOM.

```kotlin
suspend fun main() {
  val count = document.getElementById("count")
  countFlow().collect { value ->
    count.innerText = "$value"
  }
}
```

---

Whether it’s a 100% Compose UI Android app, a Kotlin multiplatform project with many targets, or something in-between, [Molecule](https://github.com/cashapp/molecule/) is here to help you manage state using Compose.
